# useContext: simple Counter

## 📝 Your Notes

### React Context

`context` in React is a feature that solves the problem of sharing state between
components. You can insert a piece of state into a section of a react tree and
access that state anywhere within that react tree. The `React.createContext`
hook returns a `context` that can then be used to extract that shared state. To
access the shared `context` the component attempting to use it must be within
the react tree of the `context`'s Provider component.

This prevents a common problem called prop drilling where you pass state down a
react tree via props through multiple layers of components that don't use the
state so a nested component further down the tree can have access to that data.

`context` example:

Ex:

```javascript
export const UserContext = React.useContext()

// It's good practice to create a Component that encapsulates
// the raw `Context.Provider` API. You can then
// create the states and what not the context should
// be providing in it
const UserContextProvider({children}) {
  const [username, setUsername] = React.useState('')

  const value = [username, setUsername]
  return (
    <UserContext.Provider
      value={value}
      children={children}
    />
  )
}

function App() {
  return (
    <UserContextProvider>
      {/* All components wrapped in `UserContextProvider` will have access to the context*/}
      <main>
        <h1>Welcome My App!/h1>
        <Profile />
      </main>
    </UserContextProvider>
  )
}
```

Any components rendered within the `UserContextProvider` component can get
access to the state defined and passed through via the `UserContext.Provider`
component's `value` prop.

```javascript
function Profile() {
  return (
    <div className="profile-container">
      <h2>Profile</h2>
      <ProfileBody />
    </div>
  )
}

function ProfileBody() {
  // could also nab the `setUsername` if needed
  const [username] = React.useContext(UserContext)
  return <p>My name is ${userName}</p>
}
```

### Composition instead of React Context

Many believe that `context` is overkill in most scenarios. `context` should be
used for truly global state. Instead of using `context`, first try to opt for
better composition of components.

Composition of components is achieved by creating components that expose the
`children` prop and render them as its content instead controlling all markup
that gets rendered.

The `Profile` component did not make use of the `children` prop, it just
rendered everything. It accepted no props, and you have no idea what `Profile`
actually renders. It's like a black box.

This scenario I'm referring to `Profile` is contrived. I could define `username`
state within App and pass it down as a prop to `Profile`, etc. but for the sake
of this example we'll go with it. It was just an example of the kind of problem
`context` can solve. You can imagine a more complex component tree many layers
deep with more than 1 component that requires the user state.

What if instead we defined `Profile` to accept a `children` prop and had it
render the children like so:

```javascript
function Profile({children}) {
  return (
    <div className="profile-container">
      <h1>Welcome to my Profile!</h1>
      {children}
    </div>
  )
}
```

Then `App` could instead pass the `children` that are supposed to get rendered
in the `Profile` and provide the `username` state to the component that needs
it, `ProfileBody`, avoiding prop drilling and having to use `context`.

```javascript
function App() {
  const [username, setUsername] = React.useState('')
  return (
    <main>
      <h1>I love my App! Welcome!</h1>
      <Profile>
        <h3>Here's some more info about me!</h3>
        <ProfileBody username={username} />
      </ProfileBody>
    </main>
  )
}
```

With that, we've eliminated one layer of prop drilling. Now `Profile` doesn't
accept a `username`, it's job is just to render the `children` it's passed.

This makes `Profile` much more customizable because the consumer can decide what
gets rendered in the `Profile`.

### Creating a consumer hook to get access to `context`

Instead of calling `React.useContext` and having to import `context` everywhere,
you can encapsulate the logic that accesses it. This consumer hook is
responsible for throwing an error if the context cannot be accessed.

```javascript
const useUserContext() {
  const context = React.useContext(UserContext);

  if (!context) {
    throw new Error(`useUserContext must be used within the UserContextProvider`)
  }

  const [username, setUsername] = context;
  return [username, setUsername]
}
```

You could then move the `context` creation and the consumer hook to their own
file and import the hook and `context` where ever its needed

### Implementing a shareable cache using `useReducer` and React `context`

(from extra credit 2)

You use `useReducer` and pass it a reducer that maintains the cache. The cache
is an object with keys that are `pokemonName`s. The reducer exposes an
`ADD_POKEMON` action that will add the provided `pokemonName` key to the cache
with the value passed in being the pokemon's data.

Then you use `createContext` to get a `context` object and create a
`<name-of-context>Provider`, ex. `PokemonCacheContextProvider` and in there you
create the state you want to manage in the `context` and pass it as the `value`
prop on the `<name-of-context>.Provider` component ie.
`<PokemonCacheContext.Provider>`. Then render the `children`. All the children
that rendered inside the `<PokemonCacheProvider>` react component tree would
have access to the pokemon cache.

A further enhancement is to create a consumer hook for the `context`. Instead of
having consumers use `React.useContext(PokemonCacheContext)`, you encapsulate
using the `context` object in a custom hook that can check for errors if the
component being rendered isn't within the `PokemonCacheProvider`. Also prevents
from having to export the `context` object at all.

**Note:** When using the `dispatch` function (aka. state updater) from a React
`useReducer` hook, React will ensure that that `dispatch` function is stable
between renders, meaning it won't be changing and causing un-necessary
re-renders. Sometimes when passing the `dispatch` function returned from
`useReducer` around, React won't be able to realize it's a stable `dispatch`
function from `useReducer`, so you'll have to pass it as an element in a
dependency array if it's used in a `useEffect`.

### Using React `context` effectively

Keep in mind for this simple scenario of the cache provider, lifting state would
have been an appropriate solution. Overusing `context` can be an un-necessary
over head if not used appropriately. Try to inject React `context` as close to
its consumers as possible in the component tree and avoid over exposing
`context` where it's not needed. A common mistake is exposing `context` App
wide, yet only a smaller subjection of the component tree needs it.

### Adding a `remove from cache` button

`PreviousPokemon` could also render a `remove` button, that'll issue a
`REMOVE_POKEMON` event that'll accept `pokemonName` and remove that key from the
cache. Then it has to reset the `useAsync` state.

So to do that I:

- Created a `REMOVE_POKEMON` action on the `pokemonCacheReducer` that will
  delete the passed in `pokemonName` off the cache object.
- Added an additional button in the `PreviousPokemon` component to render next
  to the button that selects a pokemon in cache, called `remove`.
- Setup a `onClick` handler that will use the `onSelect` to clear out the
  `pokemonName` and uses the pokemon cache dispatch function to issue a
  `REMOVE_POKEMON` action with the pokemon the of the remove button clicked.
- Updated the `useAsync` `asyncReducer` to have an `idle` action that will set
  the status to `idle` and `data` and `error` to `null`.

#### Deficiencies in this implementation

- Currently will unconditionally set `pokemonName` to empty string. This could
  probably be better. I wouldn't want to set `pokemonName` to an empty string if
  I wasn't removing the `pokemon` that's currently being rendered. Could also
  show any of the other pokemon in the cache as well, instead of just resetting

#### Solution to Previous Deficiencies

The initial implementation of `PokemonInfo` was responsible for fetching the
pokemon based on the current `pokemonName` and used the `PokemonCacheContext`,
and if `pokemonName` not in cache, it then dispatches the `ADD_POKEMON` action.

Having `PokemonInfo` manage the `pokemon` and the use of `useAsync`, made it
impossible for its sibling `PreviousPokemon` to reset the `useAsync` state using
`setIdle`.

So I migrated the management of the async call to get the pokemon to the
`PokemonSection` component and had it manage removing a pokemon from cache. So I
created a `handleRemove` function and passed that to `PreviousPokemon` to use as
the `onClick` handler for when the `remove` button was clicked. This allowed
that `handleRemove` to also reset the `useAsync` state and manage what
`pokemonName` was.

I also implemented it such if a pokemon was removed from cache, but there were
still other pokemon in cache it would render one of those.

## Background

Sharing state between components is a common problem. The best solution for this
is to 📜
[lift your state](https://react.dev/learn/sharing-state-between-components).
This requires 📜 [prop drilling](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling)
which is not a problem, but there are some times where prop drilling can cause a
real pain.

To avoid this pain, we can insert some state into a section of our react tree,
and then extract that state anywhere within that react tree without having to
explicitly pass it everywhere. This feature is called `context`. In some ways
it's like global variables, but it doesn't suffer from the same problems (and
maintainability nightmares) of global variables thanks to how the API works to
make the relationships explicit.

Here's how you use context:

```javascript
import * as React from 'react'

const FooContext = React.createContext()

function FooDisplay() {
  const foo = React.useContext(FooContext)
  return <div>Foo is: {foo}</div>
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <FooContext.Provider value="I am foo">
    <FooDisplay />
  </FooContext.Provider>,
  document.getElementById('root'),
)
// renders <div>Foo is: I am foo</div>
```

`<FooDisplay />` could appear anywhere in the render tree, and it will have
access to the `value` which is passed by the `FooContext.Provider` component.

Note that as a first argument to `createContext`, you can provide a default
value which React will use in the event someone calls `useContext` with your
context, when no value has been provided:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

Most of the time, I don't recommend using a default value because it's probably
a mistake to try and use context outside a provider, so in our exercise I'll
show you how to avoid that from happening.

🦉 Keep in mind that while context makes sharing state easy, it's not the only
solution to Prop Drilling pains and it's not necessarily the best solution
either. React's composition model is powerful and can be used to avoid issues
with prop drilling as well. Learn more about this from
[Michael Jackson on X](https://x.com/mjackson/status/1195495535483817984)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/03.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.js)

We're putting everything in one file to keep things simple, but I've labeled
things a bit so you know that typically your context provider will be placed in
a different file and expose the provider component itself as well as the custom
hook to access the context value.

We're going to take the Count component that we had before and separate the
button from the count display. We need to access both the `count` state as well
as the `setCount` updater in these different components which live in different
parts of the tree. Normally lifting state up would be the way to solve this
trivial problem, but this is a contrived example so you can focus on learning
how to use context.

Your job is to fill in the `CountProvider` function component so that the app
works and the tests pass.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 create a consumer hook

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-1.js)

Imagine what would happen if someone tried to consume your context value without
using your context provider. For example, as mentioned above when discussing the
default value:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

If you don't provide a default context value, that would render
`<div>Foo is: </div>`. This is because the context value would be `undefined`.
In real-world scenarios, having an unexpected `undefined` value can result in
errors that can be difficult to debug.

In this extra credit, you need to create a custom hook that I can use like this:

```javascript
const [count, setCount] = useCount()
```

And if you change the `App` to this:

```javascript
function App() {
  return (
    <div>
      <CountDisplay />
      <Counter />
    </div>
  )
}
```

It should throw an error indicating that `useCount` may only be used from within
a (child of a) CountProvider.

### 2. 💯 caching in a context provider

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-2.js)

Let's try the last exercise over again with a bit more of a complex/practical
example. That's right! We're back to the Pokemon info app! This time it has
caching in place which is cool. So if you enter the same pokemon information,
it's cached so it loads instantaneously.

However, we have a requirement that we want to list all the cached pokemon in
another part of the app, so we're going to use context to store the cache. This
way both parts of the app which need access to the pokemon cache will have
access.

Because this is hard to describe in words (and because it's a completely
separate example), there's a starting point for you in
`./src/exercise/03.extra-2.js`.

## 🦉 Other notes

`Context` also has the unique ability to be scoped to a specific section of the
React component tree. A common mistake of context (and generally any
"application" state) is to make it globally available anywhere in your
application when it's actually only needed to be available in a part of the app
(like a single page). Keeping a context value scoped to the area that needs it
most has improved performance and maintainability characteristics.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=03%3A%20useContext%3A%20simple%20Counter&em=).
