# useLayoutEffect: auto-scrolling textarea

## 📝 Your Notes

### When to use `useEffect` vs. `useLayoutEffect`

`useEffect` will not block browser painting. If you refer the
[React Hook Flow Diagram](https://github.com/donavon/hook-flow), you can see
that the mount and update flow is:

- [`lazyInitializers on mount only`]
- `render`
- `React DOM updates`
- `Cleanup Layout Effects`
- `Run LayoutEffects`
- `Browser Paints Screen`
- `Cleanup Effects`
- `Run Effects`

As you can see, layout effects flow will run right after React DOM updates,
before the browser paints the screen. If you have changes that mutate the DOM
(via a DOM node ref) **and** the DOM mutations will change the appearance of the
DOM node between the time that it is rendered and your effect mutates it, then
you **don't** want to use `useEffect`. You'll want to use `useLayoutEffect`,
otherwise the user could see a flicker when your DOM mutations take effect.

**This is pretty much the only time you want to avoid `useEffect` and use**
**`useLayoutEffect` instead.**

`useLayoutEffect` runs synchronously immediately after React has performed all
DOM mutations. `useLayoutEffect` can be useful if you need to make DOM
measurements (like getting the scroll position or other styles for an element)
and then making DOM mutations **or** or trigger a synchronous re-render by
updating state.

#### Summary of when to use `useEffect` or `useLayoutEffect`

- `useLayoutEffect`: if you need to mutate the DOM and/or **do need** to perform
  measurement
- `useEffect`: if you don't need to interact with the DOM at all or your DOM
  changes are unobservable

#### `useLayoutEffect` to set a `ref`

Another useful situation to use `useLayoutEffect` is if you want to update a
value like a `ref` and you want to make sure it's up-to-date before any other
codes runs.

#### Default behavior

The default behavior is to let the browser re-paint based on DOM updates before
React runs your code. This means your code won't block the browser and the user
sees updates to the DOM sooner. So stick with `useEffect` most of the time.
`useLayoutEffect` runs synchronously immediately after render, blocking the
browser from re-painting the screen.

## Background

There are two ways to tell React to run side-effects after it renders:

1. `useEffect`
2. `useLayoutEffect`

The difference about these is subtle (they have the exact same API), but
significant. 99% of the time `useEffect` is what you want, but sometimes
`useLayoutEffect` can improve your user experience.

To learn about the difference, read
[useEffect vs useLayoutEffect](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/useeffect-vs-uselayouteffect)

And check out the [hook flow diagram](https://github.com/donavon/hook-flow) as
well.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/04.js)

NOTE: React 18 has smoothed out the differences in the UX between `useEffect`
and `useLayoutEffect`. That said, the simple "rule" described still applies!

There's no exercise for this one because basically you just need to replace
`useEffect` with `useLayoutEffect` and you're good. So you pretty much just need
to experiment with things a bit.

Before you do that though, compare the finished example with the exercise.
Add/remove messages and you'll find that there's a janky experience with the
exercise version because we're using `useEffect` and there's a gap between the
time that the DOM is visually updated and our code runs.

Here's the simple rule for when you should use `useLayoutEffect`: If you are
making observable changes to the DOM, then it should happen in
`useLayoutEffect`, otherwise `useEffect`.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=04%3A%20useLayoutEffect%3A%20auto-scrolling%20textarea&em=).
